README.md, before:

# show

A pragmatic terminal file viewer and search helper.

`show` is implemented in Nushell and designed to be used from a modern shell environment.

It renders files intelligently in your terminal and acts as a reliable
preview command for `fzf`. It selects the best available renderer based on
mime detection, terminal capabilities, and installed tools — with safe fallbacks.

This is not a pager replacement and not a file manager.  
It is glue that makes existing CLI tools work together predictably.

---

## Why

Most `fzf` preview setups start simple and slowly turn into fragile shell
scripts:

- hard-coded tool checks
- terminal-specific hacks
- broken scrolling with image previews
- Duplicated logic between preview and search

`show` centralizes this logic.

It detects file types, selects an appropriate renderer, and falls back
gracefully when something is unsupported. The same rendering logic is used
for previewing files, browsing directories, and searching with ripgrep.

---

## How it works

`show` uses a simple renderer pipeline:

```

File
↓
MIME detection
↓
renderer list
↓
first compatible renderer
↓
output

```

For each file:

1. The MIME type is detected (using `file` if available)
2. Matching renderer groups are looked up
3. Renderers are tried in order
4. The first renderer that:
   - is available
   - supports the current terminal
   - has all required commands installed  
   is used

If no renderer matches, `show` falls back safely.
This usually means printing the filepath or listing directory contents,
depending on the input type.

### Example

A `text/plain` file may be rendered by:

- `bat`
- `sed`
- `cat`

If `bat` is installed, it is used.  
If not, `sed` is tried.  
If that fails, `cat` is used.

---

### fzf integration (POSIX shells)


For `/bin/sh`, `bash`, `zsh`:

```sh
export FZF_DEFAULT_OPTS='--preview="show --glob --jump-to-line '\'' {2} '\'' {1}" --delimiter=":"'
```

Same with nu

```nu
$env.FZF_DEFAULT_OPTS = r#'--preview="show --glob --jump-to-line ' {2} ' {1}" --delimiter=":"'#
```

The spaces around `{2}` are intentional.
They avoid a known fzf issue where empty fields are replaced with nothing,
which can break argument boundaries.

## Usage

Preview a file:

```sh
show file.txt
```

Preview a directory (searches for common files like `README`, configurable):

```sh
show -g .
```

Use as an `fzf` preview command:

```sh
fzf --preview 'show {}'
```

Jump to a specific line (used automatically by `show search`):

```sh
show -j 120 file.txt
```

Enable debug logging:

```sh
show --debug file.txt
```

---

## Search

`show search` combines `ripgrep` and `fzf` and reuses the same preview logic.

```sh
show search -F 'open --raw'
```

Search only certain files:

```sh
show search -g '**/*.nu'
```

Search in another directory without having to cd to it:

```sh
show search -d ~/projects/show/testbed 'success'
```

Enable auto-reload (rerun ripgrep on each query change):

```sh
show search -g '**/*.nu' -a
```

Previews shown during search are rendered exactly like `show file`, including
syntax highlighting and image support.

Selecting files in fzf results in an opened Editor at the given line if your Editor supports that.

---

## Configuration

Configuration is optional.

By default, `show` works out of the box.
It can be customized via:

```
$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/show/config.toml
```

You can configure:

* Which files are searched when previewing directories
* MIME type → renderer mappings
* terminal-specific renderer restrictions
* editor integration for `show search`

The configuration is merged on top of sane defaults.

See `config.toml` and `config.example.toml` in the repository for all available options.

---

## Image rendering

Image previews are supported when the terminal allows it.

Supported renderers (used if available):

* `kitten icat` (kitty, ghostty)
* `imgcat` (iTerm2)
* `chafa` (sixel / ASCII fallback)

If image rendering is not supported, `show` falls back to print the path.

---

## Dependencies

Required:

* Nushell

Optional (used if available):

* bat
* ripgrep
* fzf
* chafa
* kitty (`kitten icat`)
* imgcat
* sed
* less

Missing tools are handled gracefully.

---

## Non-goals

* Replacing your pager
* Acting as a file manager
* Supporting every terminal image protocol

`show` focuses on being a predictable preview and search helper that plays
well with existing CLI tools.

---

## License

MIT OR Apache-2.0

Commit message:

fix: demo and credits in the README

README.md, after:

# show

A pragmatic terminal file viewer and search helper.

`show` is implemented in Nushell and designed to be used from a modern shell environment.

It renders files intelligently in your terminal and acts as a reliable
preview command for `fzf`. It selects the best available renderer based on
mime detection, terminal capabilities, and installed tools — with safe fallbacks.

This is not a pager replacement and not a file manager.  
It is glue that makes existing CLI tools work together predictably.

---

## Demo

[![asciicast](https://asciinema.org/a/762163.svg)](https://asciinema.org/a/762163)

---

## How it works

`show` uses a simple renderer pipeline:

```

File
↓
MIME detection
↓
renderer list
↓
first compatible renderer
↓
output

```

For each file:

1. The MIME type is detected (using `file` if available)
2. Matching renderer groups are looked up
3. Renderers are tried in order
4. The first renderer that:
   - is available
   - supports the current terminal
   - has all required commands installed  
   is used

If no renderer matches, `show` falls back safely.
This usually means printing the filepath or listing directory contents,
depending on the input type.

### Example

A `text/plain` file may be rendered by:

- `bat`
- `sed`
- `cat`

If `bat` is installed, it is used.  
If not, `sed` is tried.  
If that fails, `cat` is used.

---

### fzf integration (POSIX shells)


For `/bin/sh`, `bash`, `zsh`:

```sh
export FZF_DEFAULT_OPTS='--preview="show --glob --jump-to-line '\'' {2} '\'' {1}" --delimiter=":"'
```

Same with nu

```nu
$env.FZF_DEFAULT_OPTS = r#'--preview="show --glob --jump-to-line ' {2} ' {1}" --delimiter=":"'#
```

The spaces around `{2}` are intentional.
They avoid a known fzf issue where empty fields are replaced with nothing,
which can break argument boundaries.

## Usage

Preview a file:

```sh
show file.txt
```

Preview a directory (searches for common files like `README`, configurable):

```sh
show -g .
```

Use as an `fzf` preview command:

```sh
fzf --preview 'show {}'
```

Jump to a specific line (used automatically by `show search`):

```sh
show -j 120 file.txt
```

Enable debug logging:

```sh
show --debug file.txt
```

---

## Search

`show search` combines `ripgrep` and `fzf` and reuses the same preview logic.

```sh
show search -F 'open --raw'
```

Search only certain files:

```sh
show search -g '**/*.nu'
```

Search in another directory without having to cd to it:

```sh
show search -d ~/projects/show/testbed 'success'
```

Enable auto-reload (rerun ripgrep on each query change):

```sh
show search -g '**/*.nu' -a
```

Previews shown during search are rendered exactly like `show file`, including
syntax highlighting and image support.

Selecting files in fzf results in an opened Editor at the given line if your Editor supports that.

---

## Configuration

Configuration is optional.

By default, `show` works out of the box.
It can be customized via:

```
$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/show/config.toml
```

You can configure:

* Which files are searched when previewing directories
* MIME type → renderer mappings
* terminal-specific renderer restrictions
* editor integration for `show search`

The configuration is merged on top of sane defaults.

See `config.toml` and `config.example.toml` in the repository for all available options.

---

## Image rendering

Image previews are supported when the terminal allows it.

Supported renderers (used if available):

* `kitten icat` (kitty, ghostty)
* `imgcat` (iTerm2)
* `chafa` (sixel / ASCII fallback)

If image rendering is not supported, `show` falls back to print the path.

---

## Dependencies

Required:

* Nushell

Optional (used if available):

* bat
* ripgrep
* fzf
* chafa
* kitty (`kitten icat`)
* imgcat
* sed
* less

Missing tools are handled gracefully.

---

## Non-goals

* Replacing your pager
* Acting as a file manager
* Supporting every terminal image protocol

`show` focuses on being a predictable preview and search helper that plays
well with existing CLI tools.

---

## Credits

This is based on [fzf-preview.sh](https://github.com/junegunn/fzf/blob/33d8d51c8a6c6e9321b5295b3a63f548b5f18a1f/bin/fzf-preview.sh) as well as [a blog post](https://junegunn.github.io/fzf/tips/ripgrep-integration/) junegunn the author of fzf.

## License

MIT OR Apache-2.0
